README.md, before:

# mivot-validator

Python package for validating VOTables annotated with [MIVOT](https://github.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot)

The validation process is 2 steps;
- VOTable validation (against 1.3)
- MIVOT validation

Both must succeed for the file to be considered as valid

The validator can process either individual files or directory contents (no recursivity)

## Installation

The validator is distributed as a Python package.
It won't be published in the PIP repo while MIVOT is not a standard.

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ pip3 install --force-reinstall git+https://github.com/ivoa/mivot-validator.git#egg=mivot-validator
```

## Usage

### Let's play with the unit-test sample

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ ls mivot-validator/tests/data/
test_instance_ko_1.xml	test_instance_ok_1.xml
cd mivot-validator/
pytest tests
```

### Commands

Validate an annotated VOTable
```bash
 mivot-votable-validate  <VOTable path>
```

Validate an XML file containing just a MAPPING block

```bash
 mivot-mapping-validate  <XML path>
```
## Examples taken out the unit test suite
### Check the VOTable tagged as valid

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ ls mivot-validator/tests/data/
test_instance_ko_1.xml	test_instance_ok_1.xml
BossMacBookPro$ mivot-votable-validate  mivot-validator/tests/data/test_instance_ok_1.xml 
   INFO - [__init__.py:  7 -   <module>()] - mivot_validator package intialized
   INFO - [schemas.py:1228 - include_schema()] - Resource 'XMLSchema.xsd' is already loaded
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema http://www.ivoa.net/xml/VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot/master/schema/xsd/mivot-v1.0.xsd
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 76 - __validate_file()] - Validate file test_instance_ok_1.xml
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 77 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 83 - __validate_file()] - - passed
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 85 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against MIVOT
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 90 - __validate_file()] - test_instance_ok_1.xml is a valid annotated VOTable
```

### Check the file tagged as not valid

```bash
laurentmichel$ mivot-votable-validate  mivot-validator/tests/data/test_instance_ko_1.xml 
   INFO - [__init__.py:  7 -   <module>()] - mivot_validator package intialized
   INFO - [schemas.py:1228 - include_schema()] - Resource 'XMLSchema.xsd' is already loaded
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema http://www.ivoa.net/xml/VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot/master/schema/xsd/mivot-v1.0.xsd
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 76 - __validate_file()] - Validate file test_instance_ko_1.xml
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 77 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 83 - __validate_file()] - - passed
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 85 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against MIVOT
  ERROR - [xml_validator.py: 30 - validate_file()] - validation failed failed validating <Element '{http://www.ivoa.net/xml/merged-syntax}GLOBALS' at 0x7fec18998630> with XsdAssert(test='count (dm-mapping:INSTANCE[@dmrole !=...'):

Reason: assertion test if false

Schema:

  <xs:assert xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" test="count (dm-mapping:INSTANCE[@dmrole != '']) eq 0" />

Instance:

  <default:GLOBALS xmlns:default="http://www.ivoa.net/xml/merged-syntax">
      <default:INSTANCE dmid="SpaceFrame_ICRS" dmtype="coords:SpaceFrame">
          <default:INSTANCE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.refPosition" dmtype="coords:StdRefLocation">
              <default:ATTRIBUTE_XXX dmrole="coords:StdRefLocation.position" dmtype="ivoa:string" value="NoSet" />
          </default:INSTANCE>
          <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.spaceRefFrame" dmtype="ivoa:string" value="ICRS" />
          <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.equinox" dmtype="coords:Epoch" value="NoSet" />
      </default:INSTANCE>

      <default:INSTANCE dmrole="root" dmtype="test.model">
          <default:INSTANCE dmrole="test.header" dmtype="test.Header">
              <default:REFERENCE dmrole="test.frame" dmref="SpaceFrame_ICRS" />
              <default:INSTANCE dmrole="test.owner" dmtype="test.Owner">
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.owner.name" dmtype="string" value="Michel" />
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.owner.firstname" dmtype="string" value="Laurent" />
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.title" dmtype="string" ref="_title" />
              </default:INSTANCE>
              <default:COLLECTION dmrole="test.points">
                  <default:JOIN sourceref="Results" />
              </default:COLLECTION>
      ...
      ...
  </default:GLOBALS>

Path: /VOTABLE/RESOURCE/RESOURCE[1]/default:VODML/default:GLOBALS

  ERROR - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 88 - __validate_file()] - MIVOT annotations are not valid

```

### Advanced Features


#### Model Hierarchy Checking

This tool checks that mapped classes match the model they refer to. It requires as input an annotated VOTable. This VOTable is parsed with a model viewer issuing a model view on the first data row. Each instance of that view is compared
with the VODML class definition. This beta feature works with PhotDM, Meas, Coords and a MANGO draft. Any other model, but `ivoa` which is skipped, make the process failing. 

```bash
mivot-instance-validate <VOTABLE path>
```

The validation process follows these steps
- INPUT: a VOTable annotated with the supported models. 
  - The annotation must have at least one valid TEMPLATES 
  - The current implementation works only with VOTables having one table.
- Build a model view of the first data row (`mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/xml_interpreter/model_viewer.py`).
- All top level INSTANCEs of that model view will be checked one by one.
- The XML blocks corresponding to these instances are extracted as etree objects
- Get the `dmtype` on the instance to validate
- build an XML snippets for that class from the VODML file (`mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/snippet_builder.py`)
- These snippets are stored in `mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/tmp_snippets` (&ast;)
- The validator checks any component of the mapped instance against the snippet.
  - if the component is an ATTRIBUTE, both dmtypes and roles are checked
  - if the component is a COLLECTION, dmrole as well as items dmtypes are checked
  - if the component is a REFERENCE, dmrole is checked
  - if the component is an INSTANCE, both dmtypes and roles are checked and the validation loop is run on its components

The validator only checks the model elements that are mapped. It does not care about missing attributes or any other missing class components.
MIVOT does not have requirements on the model elements that must be mapped.

(&ast;) It is to be noted that those snippets can be used to build annotations. If you feed the validator with an empty INSTANCE with the searched dmtype:
```
<INSTANCE dmtype="model:MyFavouriteType"\>
```
you get an XML snippet named `model.MyFavouriteType.xml` that can be copied and tuned into your VOTable

#### Types and Roles Checking (obsoleted)

The validator has a new end point that can check that all `dmtype` and `dmrole` referenced in the mapping block are known 
by mapped models.
It does not care of the class structures
This checking only works with the Meas/Coord/ivoa models, other models are ignored.

```bash
types-and-roles-validate <VOTABLE path>
```

Commit message:

Add explanation for mivot-generic-snippet command.

README.md, after:

# mivot-validator

Python package for validating VOTables annotated with [MIVOT](https://github.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot)

The validation process is 2 steps;
- VOTable validation (against 1.3)
- MIVOT validation

Both must succeed for the file to be considered as valid

The validator can process either individual files or directory contents (no recursivity)

## Installation

The validator is distributed as a Python package.
It won't be published in the PIP repo while MIVOT is not a standard.

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ pip3 install --force-reinstall git+https://github.com/ivoa/mivot-validator.git#egg=mivot-validator
```

## Usage

### Let's play with the unit-test sample

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ ls mivot-validator/tests/data/
test_instance_ko_1.xml	test_instance_ok_1.xml
cd mivot-validator/
pytest tests
```

### Commands

Validate an annotated VOTable
```bash
 mivot-votable-validate  <VOTable path>
```

Validate an XML file containing just a MAPPING block

```bash
 mivot-mapping-validate  <XML path>
```

Create a list of  generic code snippets from a model file

```bash
 mivot-snippet-generic <XML path>
```
>*Note* :
> - the `XML path` can be a local file or a link to a file on the web.
> - the output will be stored in mivot_validator/instance_checking/tmp_snippets folder.

## Examples taken out the unit test suite
### Check the VOTable tagged as valid

```bash
BossMacBookPro$ ls mivot-validator/tests/data/
test_instance_ko_1.xml	test_instance_ok_1.xml
BossMacBookPro$ mivot-votable-validate  mivot-validator/tests/data/test_instance_ok_1.xml 
   INFO - [__init__.py:  7 -   <module>()] - mivot_validator package intialized
   INFO - [schemas.py:1228 - include_schema()] - Resource 'XMLSchema.xsd' is already loaded
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema http://www.ivoa.net/xml/VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot/master/schema/xsd/mivot-v1.0.xsd
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 76 - __validate_file()] - Validate file test_instance_ok_1.xml
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 77 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 83 - __validate_file()] - - passed
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 85 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against MIVOT
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 90 - __validate_file()] - test_instance_ok_1.xml is a valid annotated VOTable
```

### Check the file tagged as not valid

```bash
laurentmichel$ mivot-votable-validate  mivot-validator/tests/data/test_instance_ko_1.xml 
   INFO - [__init__.py:  7 -   <module>()] - mivot_validator package intialized
   INFO - [schemas.py:1228 - include_schema()] - Resource 'XMLSchema.xsd' is already loaded
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema http://www.ivoa.net/xml/VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [xml_validator.py: 17 -   __init__()] - Using schema https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ivoa-std/ModelInstanceInVot/master/schema/xsd/mivot-v1.0.xsd
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 76 - __validate_file()] - Validate file test_instance_ko_1.xml
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 77 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against VOTable/v1.3
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 83 - __validate_file()] - - passed
   INFO - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 85 - __validate_file()] - - Validate against MIVOT
  ERROR - [xml_validator.py: 30 - validate_file()] - validation failed failed validating <Element '{http://www.ivoa.net/xml/merged-syntax}GLOBALS' at 0x7fec18998630> with XsdAssert(test='count (dm-mapping:INSTANCE[@dmrole !=...'):

Reason: assertion test if false

Schema:

  <xs:assert xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" test="count (dm-mapping:INSTANCE[@dmrole != '']) eq 0" />

Instance:

  <default:GLOBALS xmlns:default="http://www.ivoa.net/xml/merged-syntax">
      <default:INSTANCE dmid="SpaceFrame_ICRS" dmtype="coords:SpaceFrame">
          <default:INSTANCE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.refPosition" dmtype="coords:StdRefLocation">
              <default:ATTRIBUTE_XXX dmrole="coords:StdRefLocation.position" dmtype="ivoa:string" value="NoSet" />
          </default:INSTANCE>
          <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.spaceRefFrame" dmtype="ivoa:string" value="ICRS" />
          <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="coords:SpaceFrame.equinox" dmtype="coords:Epoch" value="NoSet" />
      </default:INSTANCE>

      <default:INSTANCE dmrole="root" dmtype="test.model">
          <default:INSTANCE dmrole="test.header" dmtype="test.Header">
              <default:REFERENCE dmrole="test.frame" dmref="SpaceFrame_ICRS" />
              <default:INSTANCE dmrole="test.owner" dmtype="test.Owner">
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.owner.name" dmtype="string" value="Michel" />
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.owner.firstname" dmtype="string" value="Laurent" />
                  <default:ATTRIBUTE dmrole="test.title" dmtype="string" ref="_title" />
              </default:INSTANCE>
              <default:COLLECTION dmrole="test.points">
                  <default:JOIN sourceref="Results" />
              </default:COLLECTION>
      ...
      ...
  </default:GLOBALS>

Path: /VOTABLE/RESOURCE/RESOURCE[1]/default:VODML/default:GLOBALS

  ERROR - [annotated_votable_validator.py: 88 - __validate_file()] - MIVOT annotations are not valid

```

### Advanced Features


#### Model Hierarchy Checking

This tool checks that mapped classes match the model they refer to. It requires as input an annotated VOTable. This VOTable is parsed with a model viewer issuing a model view on the first data row. Each instance of that view is compared
with the VODML class definition. This beta feature works with PhotDM, Meas, Coords and a MANGO draft. Any other model, but `ivoa` which is skipped, make the process failing. 

```bash
mivot-instance-validate <VOTABLE path>
```

The validation process follows these steps
- INPUT: a VOTable annotated with the supported models. 
  - The annotation must have at least one valid TEMPLATES 
  - The current implementation works only with VOTables having one table.
- Build a model view of the first data row (`mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/xml_interpreter/model_viewer.py`).
- All top level INSTANCEs of that model view will be checked one by one.
- The XML blocks corresponding to these instances are extracted as etree objects
- Get the `dmtype` on the instance to validate
- build an XML snippets for that class from the VODML file (`mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/snippet_builder.py`)
- These snippets are stored in `mivot-validator/mivot_validator/instance_checking/tmp_snippets` (&ast;)
- The validator checks any component of the mapped instance against the snippet.
  - if the component is an ATTRIBUTE, both dmtypes and roles are checked
  - if the component is a COLLECTION, dmrole as well as items dmtypes are checked
  - if the component is a REFERENCE, dmrole is checked
  - if the component is an INSTANCE, both dmtypes and roles are checked and the validation loop is run on its components

The validator only checks the model elements that are mapped. It does not care about missing attributes or any other missing class components.
MIVOT does not have requirements on the model elements that must be mapped.

(&ast;) It is to be noted that those snippets can be used to build annotations. If you feed the validator with an empty INSTANCE with the searched dmtype:
```
<INSTANCE dmtype="model:MyFavouriteType"\>
```
you get an XML snippet named `model.MyFavouriteType.xml` that can be copied and tuned into your VOTable

#### Types and Roles Checking (obsoleted)

The validator has a new end point that can check that all `dmtype` and `dmrole` referenced in the mapping block are known 
by mapped models.
It does not care of the class structures
This checking only works with the Meas/Coord/ivoa models, other models are ignored.

```bash
types-and-roles-validate <VOTABLE path>
```
